---
title: "Data Communication"
collection: teaching
type: "Undergraduate course"
permalink: /teaching/2022_2023-teaching-1
venue: "School of Engineering, Polytechnic Institute of Porto, Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering"
date: 2023-09-18
location: "Porto, Portugal"
---

**Date**: 2023-09-18 \\
**Role**: Assistant Professor \\
\\
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering \\
School of Engineering, Polytechnic Institute of Porto


## Course Description

### Goals

Overall study of digital data communications systems, with special emphasis to wire/wireless local area networks (LANs). In this context several issues will be focused: topologies, medium, media access protocols, flow and error control, inter networking, standards and technologies.

Such study will use different reference models: Open System Interconnection (OSI), IETF's TCP/IP (Transmission Control Protocol/Internet Protocol) and the IEEE's 802 reference model. Comprehension of the concepts associated with the transmission of digital signals: synchronous and asynchronous.

To understand the OSI and TCP/IP reference model. To characterize the functionalities of the various layers of each reference model. To understand the mechanisms for flow and error control, the HDLC protocol.

To characterize different network types: LAN, MAN and WAN, in particular the local data networks, and the operation of the Ethernet IEEE 802.3, ring networks, IEEE 802.11 wireless networks. Understanding the MAC and LLC sublayers.

Analyze the efficiency of media access protocols. Knowledge of TCP / IP, IP addressing and services configuration of these networks.

### Program

- Introduction to digital communication systems. Digital transmission of digital signals: synchronous and asynchronous.
- Layered models: concepts, benefits and terminology. OSI reference model of ISO, the IETF TCP/IP Reference Model. Comparison between the two models.
- Logical link control concepts and approaches. Frame, fragmentation and reassembly of information. Flow control: stop & wait and sliding window. Error control: ARQ mechanisms. Performance Analysis. The HDLC protocol.
- Local area networks: Architectures LAN, MAN and WAN. IEEE 802 model: MAC and LLC. Ethernet IEEE 802.3, ring topologies, IEEE 802.11 wireless network. Medium access control protocols. VLANs.
- The TCP/IP protocol stack. IP addressing and configuration of TCP/IP services. Routing. The DNS service. Application Protocols.


